---
layout: post
title: NorDevCon a day filled with passion!
comments: true
tags:
  - software development
---

This years Norfolk Developer Conference (NorDevCon) took place on the 27th of
Febrary and what a feast it was! The conference which traditionally has a heavy
focus on Tech and Agile was this year bolstered by a new business track as well
as more design sessions. 

The day started off with an introduction by Paul Grenyer
([@pjgrenyer](https://twitter.com/pjgrenyer)) who organised the event, followed
by a short speech by Huw Sayer ([@HuwSayer](https://twitter.com/HuwSayer))
congratulating Norwich on now being an official #TechCluster on the
([@TechCityUK](https://twitter.com/TechCityUK)) map. This is a great
achievement and it was interesting to hear about [the journey that lead to the
official
recognition](http://norfolkchamber.co.uk/knowledge/guest-blogs/how-build-innovation-and-tech-cluster-norfolk).

The event was then official opened by Jon Skeet
([@jonskeet](https://twitter.com/jonskeet)) giving the opening keynote, which
was all about passion! Jon started out on the premise that conferences are
useful for connecting and inspiring people and this comes from passion. In fact
Jon went as far as saying that conferences are all about inspiration and not
about learning.

One take home message from Jon's talk was that we can not always work on things
that we are passionate about. However, we can always strive to find something
interesting in the dullest of task. For example by trying to understand the
problem space or by working out how to do something as well as possible. In
other words be curious. If nothing else it will make you a more interesting
person to work with. 

How do you share and grow passion with people that you meet and work with? Jon
suggested that you should listen, encourage, nurture and feed other people's
passion. However, which ideas spread will be partly down to charisma. This
means that we all have a role to make sure that this does not become to
unbalanced. In other words we all have a role in echoing what other people have
done; to amplify other people's message without taking them over. One of the
great benefits of nurturing passion is that a team with shared passion can
really "motor along" and achieve great things.

The dangers of passion were also dealt with. Jon identified three types of
destructive behaviour and outlined ways in which to deal with them.

The first scenario was when two people on a team disagree. It happens a lot. It
happens a lot with good people. It is inevitable as more often than not there
is more than one solution. What to do? The team needs to pick one way forward.
However, it is at this point that the whole team needs to look after the person
who "lost". Otherwise the dynamics of the team can get unbalanced. In
particular if the same person "loses" several times there is the danger that
that person will feel that his/her opinions and suggestions are not appreciated
and he/she may well start looking for a different place to work and the team
will loose diversity.

The second danger scenario identified was inter team disagreement. For example
the fast and furious team having to work with the really careful team. In this
case you get positive feedback loops in both camps, where all the negative
views are constantly being re-enforced by the people you trust, i.e. the people
on your team. In this scenario there will be a need for compromise and the
teams will need to talk face-to-face.

The third danger scenario was a team with no disagreement at all. Although a
team with shared passion can really "motor along", what happens if the team was
running in the wrong direction from the start? To avoid this scenario Jon's
suggested solution was to take a step back and make sure that you think about
the business value. What is the ultimate goal of the project? Will it make
people happy?

After describing the dangers Jon did add the caveat that clearly the easy
solutions outlined above are not at all easy in real life.

Finally, Jon gave us a challenge. The challenge was to bath in
passion! If a speaker did not inspire us with passion we should leave the
session and find passion somewhere else. When we introduced ourselves to
each other in the breaks we should do so with passion!

With those thoughts embedded in our minds we then went out to seek our fortune
in the rest of the conference.

I had a great time! I met up with old friends and I made new friends. I had my
appetite whet for [Docker](https://www.docker.com) by Dom Davis
([@idomdavis](https://twitter.com/idomdavis)). I learnt about browser APIs from
Ruth John ([@Rumyra](https://twitter.com/Rumyra)); via the medium of
[VJing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VJing)! I was inspired by Seb Rose
([@sebrose](https://twitter.com/sebrose)) to write more and better tests. I had
minor revelations on how to improve my coding style during the talk by Kevlin
Henney ([@KevlinHenney](https://twitter.com/KevlinHenney)). It was great!

The day was sealed off by a fast and furious closing keynote by Harry Harold
([@harryharold](https://twitter.com/harryharold)) and Rupert Redington
([@rupertredington](https://twitter.com/rupertredington)). It was a audio
visual bonanza, shining a light on the Agile manifesto, ending up in fireworks!

It was a day filled with passion and I am already looking forward to next year's
instalment of NorDevCon!
